"Previous Section"_Manual.html - "SPPARKS Website"_sws - "SPPARKS
Documentation"_sd - "SPPARKS Commands"_sc - "Next
Section"_Section_start.html :c

:link(sws,https://spparks.github.io)
:link(sd,Manual.html)
:link(sc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

1. Introduction :h3

These sections provide an overview of what SPPARKS can do, describe
what it means for SPPARKS to be an open-source code, and acknowledge
the funding and people who have contributed to SPPARKS.

1.1 "What is SPPARKS"_#intro_1
1.2 "SPPARKS features"_#intro_2
1.3 "Open source distribution"_#intro_3
1.4 "Acknowledgments and citations"_#intro_4 :all(b)

:line

1.1 What is SPPARKS :link(intro_1),h4

SPPARKS is a Monte Carlo code that has algorithms for kinetic Monte
Carlo (KMC), rejection KMC (rKMC), and Metropolis Monte Carlo (MMC).
On-lattice and off-lattice applications with spatial sites on which
"events" occur can be simulated in parallel.

KMC is also called true KMC or rejection-free KMC.  rKMC is also
called null-event MC.  In a generic sense the code's KMC and rKMC
solvers catalog a list of events, each with an associated probability,
choose a single event to perform, and advance time by the correct
amount.  Events may be chosen individually at random, or a sweep of
enumarated sites can be performed to select possible events in a more
ordered fashion.

Note that rKMC is different from Metropolis MC, which is sometimes
called thermodynamic-equilibrium MC or barrier-free MC, in that rKMC
still uses rates to define events, often associated with the rate for
the system to cross some energy barrier.  Thus both KMC and rKMC track
the dynamic evolution of a system in a time-accurate manner as events
are performed.  Metropolis MC is typically used to sample states from
a system in equilibrium or to drive a system to equilibrium (energy
minimization).  It does this be performing (possibly) non-physical
events.  As such it has no requirement to sample events with the
correct relative probabilities or to limit itself to physical events
(e.g. it can change an atom to a new species).  Because of this it
also does not evolve the system in a time-accurate manner; in general
there is no "time" associated with Metropolis MC events.

Applications are implemented in SPPARKS which define events and their
probabilities and acceptance/rejection criteria.  They are coupled to
solvers or sweepers to perform KMC or rKMC simulations.  The KMC or
rKMC options for an application in SPPARKS can be written to define
rates based on energy differences between the initial and final state
of an event and a Metropolis-style accept/reject criterion based on
the Boltzmann factor SPPARKS will then perform a Metropolis-style
Monte Carlo simulation.

In parallel, a geometric partitioning of the simulation domain is
performed.  Sub-partitioning of processor domains into colors or
quadrants (2d) and octants (3d) is done to enable multiple events to
be performed on multiple processors simultaneously.  Communication of
boundary information is performed as needed.

Parallelism can also be invoked to perform multiple runs on a
collection of processors, for statistical puposes.

SPPARKS is designed to be easy to modify and extend.  For example, new
solvers and sweeping rules can be added, as can new applications.
Applications can define new commands which are read from the input
script.

SPPARKS is written in C++.  It runs on single-processor desktop or
laptop machines, but for some applications, can also run on parallel
computers.  SPPARKS will run on any parallel machine that compiles C++
and supports the "MPI"_mpi message-passing library.  This includes
distributed- or shared-memory machines.

:link(mpi,http://www-unix.mcs.anl.gov/mpi)

SPPARKS is a freely-available open-source code.  See the "SPPARKS WWW
Site"_sws for download information.  It is distributed under the terms
of the "GNU Public License (GPL)"_gnu, or sometimes by request under
the terms of the "GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL)"_gnu2,
which means you can use or modify the code however you wish.  The only
restrictions imposed by the GPL or LGPL are on how you distribute the
code further.  See "this section"_#intro_3 for a brief discussion of
the open-source philosophy.

:link(gnu,http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html)
:link(gnu2,http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-2.1.html)

:line

1.2 SPPARKS features :link(intro_2),h4

These are three kinds of applications in SPPARKS:

on-lattice
off-lattice
general :ul

On-lattice applications define static event sites with a fixed
neighbor connectivity.  Off-lattice applications define mobile event
sites such as particles.  A particle's neighbors are typically
specified by a cutoff distance.  General applications have no
spatial component.

The set of on-lattice applications currently in SPPARKS are:

diffusion model
Ising model
Potts model in many variants
membrane model
sintering model :ul

The set of off-lattice applications currently in SPPARKS are:

Metropolis atomic relaxation model :ul

The set of general applications currently in SPPARKS are:

biochemcial reaction network model
test driver for solvers using a synthetic biochemical network :ul

These are the KMC solvers currently available in SPPARKS and their
scaling properties:

linear search, O(N)
tree search, O(logN)
composition-rejection search, O(1) :ul

Pre- and post-processing: :h4

Our group has written and released a separate toolkit called
"Pizza.py"_pizza which provides tools which can be used to setup,
analyze, plot, and visualize data for SPPARKS simulations.  Pizza.py
is written in "Python"_python and is available for download from "the
Pizza.py WWW site"_pizza.

:link(pizza,https://lammps.github.io/pizza)
:link(python,http://www.python.org)

:line

1.3 Open source distribution :link(intro_3),h4

SPPARKS comes with no warranty of any kind.  As each source file
states in its header, it is a copyrighted code that is distributed
free-of- charge, under the terms of the "GNU Public License"_gnu
(GPL), or sometimes by request under the terms of the "GNU Lesser
General Public License (LGPL)"_gnu2.  This is often referred to as
open-source distribution - see "www.gnu.org"_gnuorg or
"www.opensource.org"_opensource for more details.  The legal text of
the GPL or LGPL is in the LICENSE file that is included in the SPPARKS
distribution.

:link(gnuorg,http://www.gnu.org)
:link(opensource,http://www.opensource.org)

Here is a summary of what the GPL means for SPPARKS users:

(1) Anyone is free to use, modify, or extend SPPARKS in any way they
choose, including for commercial purposes.

(2) If you distribute a modified version of SPPARKS, it must remain
open-source, meaning you distribute source code under the terms of the
GPL.  You should clearly annotate such a code as a derivative version
of SPPARKS.

(3) If you distribute any code that used SPPARKS source code,
including calling it as a library, then that must also be open-source,
meaning you distribute its source code under the terms of the GPL.

(4) If you give SPPARKS files to someone else, the GPL LICENSE file and
source file headers (including the copyright and GPL notices) should
remain part of the code.

In the spirit of an open-source code, if you use SPPARKS for something
useful or if you fix a bug or add a new feature or applicaton to the
code, let us know.  We would like to include your contribution in the
released version of the code and/or advertise your success on our WWW
page.

:line

1.4 Acknowledgments and citations :h4,link(intro_4)

SPPARKS is distributed by "Sandia National Laboratories"_sandia.
SPPARKS development has been funded by the "US Department of
Energy"_doe (DOE), through its LDRD and ASC programs.

:link(sandia,http://www.sandia.gov)
:link(doe,http://www.doe.gov)

The "Authors page"_https://spparks.github.io/authors.html of the
SPPARKS website lists the developers and their contact info, along
with others who have contributed code and expertise to the
developement of SPPARKS.
